1.4 Swarm Intelligence and Knowledge Discovery
Data mining and particle swarm optimization may seem that they do not have many properties in common. However, they can be used together to form a method which often leads to the result, even when other methods would be too expensive or difficult to implement. Omran [47], [48] has used particle swarm optimization methods for pattern recognition and image processing. A new clustering method based on PSO is proposed and is applied to unsupervised classification and image segmentation. The PSO-based approaches are proposed to tackle the color image quantization and spectral unmixing problems.
Visual data mining via the construction of virtual reality spaces for the representation of data and knowledge, involves the solution of optimization problems. Valdes [68] introduced a hybrid technique based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) combined with classical optimization methods. This approach is applied to very high dimensional data from microarray gene expression experiments in order to understand the structure of both raw and processed data. Experiments with data sets corresponding to Alzheimer’s disease show that high quality visual representation can be obtained by combining PSO
12 Grosan, Abraham, and Chis
with classical optimization methods. The behavior of some of the parameters controlling the swarm evolution was also studied.
Sousa et al. [61], [62] have proposed the use of PSO as a tool for data mining. In order to evaluate the usefulness of PSO for data mining, an empirical comparison of the performance of three variants of PSO with another evolutionary algorithm (Genetic Algorithm), in rule discovery for classification tasks is used. Such tasks are considered core tools for decision support systems in a widespread area, ranging from the industry, commerce, military and scientific fields. The data sources used here for experimental testing are commonly used and considered as a de facto standard for rule discovery algorithms reliability ranking. The results obtained in these domains seem to indicate that PSO algorithms are competitive with other evolutionary techniques, and can be successfully applied to more demanding problem domains.
Recommender systems are new types of internet-based software tools, designed to help users to find their way through today’s complex on-line shops and entertainment websites. Ujjin and Bentley [66], [67] have described a new recommender system, which employs a particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm to learn personal preferences of users and provide tailored suggestions. Experiments are carried out to observe the performance of the system and results are compared to those obtained from the genetic algorithm (GA) recommender system and a standard, non-adaptive system based on the Pearson algorithm [7].
Another very important application of PSO is in the domain of cascading classifiers. Cascading classifiers have been used to solve pattern recognition problems in the last years. The main motivations behind such a strategy are the improvement of classification accuracy and the reduction of the complexity. The issue of class-related reject thresholds for cascading classifier systems is an important problem. It has been demonstrated in the literature that class-related reject thresholds provide an error-reject trade-off better than a single global threshold. Oliveira, Britto and Sabourin [46] proposed the using of the PSO for finding thresholds in order to improving the error-reject trade-off yielded by class-related reject thresholds. It has been proved to be very effective in solving real valued global optimization problems. In order to show the benefits of such an algorithm, they have applied it to optimize the thresholds of a cascading classifier system devoted to recognize handwritten digits. In a cascading classifier the inputs rejected by the first stage are handled by the next ones using costlier features or classifiers.
Settles and Rylander [56] have proposed a PSO method for neural network training. Chen and Abraham [8] investigated how the seemingly chaotic behavior of stock markets could be well represented using several soft computing techniques. Authors considered the flexible neural tree algorithm, a wavelet neural network, local linear wavelet neural network and finally a feed-forward artificial neural network. The parameters of the different learning techniques are optimized by the PSO approach. Experiment results reveal that PSO could play an important role to fine tune the parameters for optimal performance.

1 SwarmIntelligenceinDataMining 13
Breast cancer is one of the major tumor related cause of death in women. Various artificial intelligence techniques have been used to improve the diagnoses procedures and to aid the physician’s efforts. Chen and Abraham [9] reported a preliminary study to detect breast cancer using a Flexible Neural Tree (FNT), Neural Network (NN), Wavelet Neural Network (WNN) and their ensemble combination. For the FNT model, a tree-structure based evolutionary algorithm and PSO are used to find an optimal FNT. For the NN and WNN, the PSO is employed to optimize the free parameters. The performance of each approach is evaluated using the breast cancer data set. Simulation results show that the obtained FNT model has a fewer number of variables with reduced number of input features and without significant reduction in the detection accuracy. The overall accuracy could be improved by using an ensemble approach by a voting method.
Chen et al. [10] proposed an evolutionary procedure to design hierarchical or multilevel fuzzy system Takagi-Sugeno Fuzzy Systems (TS-FS). The hierarchical structure is evolved using Probabilistic Incremental Program Evolution (PIPE) with specific instructions. The fine tuning of the if-then rules parameters encoded in the structure is accomplished using PSO. The proposed method interleaves both PIPE and PSO optimizations. The new method results in a smaller rule-base and good learning ability. The proposed hierarchical TS-FS is evaluated by using some forecasting problems. When compared to other hierarchical TS-FS, the proposed hybrid approach exhibits competing results with high accuracy and smaller size of the hierarchical architecture.
Skopos et al. [60] have proposed a PSO method for locating periodic orbits in a three-dimensional (3D) model of barred galaxies. Method developed an appropriate scheme that transforms the problem of finding periodic orbits into the problem of detecting global minimizers of a function, which is defined on the Poincare ́ surface section of the Hamiltonian system. By combining the PSO method with deflection techniques, they succeeded in tracing systematically several periodic orbits of the system.
Cluster analysis has become an important technique in exploratory data analysis, pattern recognition, machine learning, neural computing, and other engineering. The clustering aims at identifying and extracting significant groups in underlying data. The four main classes of clustering algorithms are partitioning methods, hierarchical methods, density based clustering and grid-based clustering. Document clustering is a fundamental operation used in unsupervised document organization, automatic topic extraction, and information retrieval. Fast and high-quality document clustering algorithms play an important role in effectively navigating, summarizing, and organizing information. Recent studies have shown that partitional clustering algorithms are more suitable for clustering large datasets due to their relatively low computational requirements [63], [73]. In the field of clustering, K-means algorithm is the most popularly used algorithm to find a partition that minimizes mean square error (MSE) measure. Although K-means is an extensively useful clustering algorithm, it suffers from several drawbacks. The objective function of the K-means is not convex

14 Grosan, Abraham, and Chis
and hence it may contain local minima. Consequently, while minimizing the objective function, there is possibility of getting stuck at local minima (also at local maxima and saddle point) [55]. The performance of the K-means algorithm depends on the initial choice of the cluster centers. Besides, the Euclidean norm is sensitive to noise or outliers. Hence K-means algorithm should be affected by noise and outliers [72], [28]. In addition to the K-means algorithm, several algorithms, such as Genetic Algorithm (GA) [28], [53] and Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) [43], have been used for document clustering. Cui et al. [12] proposed a PSO based hybrid document clustering algorithm. The PSO clustering algorithm performs a globalized search in the entire solution space. In the experiments, they applied the PSO, K-means and a hybrid PSO clustering algorithm on four different text document datasets. The results illustrate that the hybrid PSO algorithm can generate more compact clustering results than the K-means algorithm.
Swarming agents in networks of physically distributed processing nodes may be used for data acquisition, data fusion, and control applications. An architecture for active surveillance systems in which simple mobile agents collectively process real time data from heterogeneous sources at or near the origin of the data is used. The system requirements are motivated with the needs of a surveillance system for the early detection of large-scale bioterrorist attacks on a civilian population, but the same architecture is applicable to a wide range of other domains. The pattern detection and classification processes executed by the proposed system emerge from the coordinated activities of agents of two populations in a shared computational environment. Detector agents draw each other’s attention to significant spatiotemporal patterns in the observed data stream. Classifier agents rank the detected patterns according to their respective criterion. The resulting system- level behavior is adaptive and robust.
Ye and Chen [24] introduced an evolutionary PSO learning-based method to optimally cluster N data points into K clusters. The hybrid PSO and K-means, with a novel alternative metric algorithm is called Alternative KPSO-clustering (AKPSO)method. This is developed to automatically detect the cluster centers of geometrical structure data sets. In AKPSO algorithm, the special alternative metric is considered to improve the traditional K-means clustering algorithm to deal with various structure data sets. Simulation results compared with some well-known clustering methods demonstrate the robustness and efficiency of the novel AKPSO method.
In the literature, there are some works related to co-evolutionary Particle Swarm Optimization (Co-PSO) [40], [58], [1]. According to Shi and Krohling [58], [37] each population is run using the standard PSO algorithm, using the other population as its environment [1]. Preliminary results demonstrated that Co-PSO constitutes a promising approach to solve constrained optimization problems. The problem is the difficulty to obtain fine tuning of the solution using a uniform distribution.

1 SwarmIntelligenceinDataMining 15
1.5 Ant Colony Optimization and Data mining
Ant colony based clustering algorithms have been first introduced by Deneubourg et al. [13] by mimicking different types of naturally-occurring emergent phenomena. Ants gather items to form heaps (clustering of dead corpses or cemeteries) observed in the species of Pheidole Pallidula and Lasius Niger. The basic mechanism underlying this type of aggregation phenomenon is an attraction between dead items mediated by the ant workers: small clusters of items grow by attracting workers to deposit more items. It is this positive and auto-catalytic feedback that leads to the formation of larger and larger clusters.
The general idea for data clustering is that isolated items should be picked up and dropped at some other location where more items of that type are present. Ramos et al. [54] proposed ACLUSTER algorithm to follow real ant-like behaviors as much as possible. In that sense, bio-inspired spatial transition probabilities are incorporated into the system, avoiding randomly moving agents, which encourage the distributed algorithm to explore regions manifestly without interest. The strategy allows guiding ants to find clusters of objects in an adaptive way.
In order to model the behavior of ants associated with different tasks (dropping and picking up objects), the use of combinations of different response thresholds was proposed. There are two major factors that should influence any local action taken by the ant-like agent: the number of objects in its neighborhood, and their similarity. Lumer and Faieta [41] used an average similarity, mixing distances between objects with their number, incorporating it simultaneously into a response threshold function like the algorithm proposed by Deneubourg et al. [13].
Admane et al. [4], presented AntPart, which is an exclusive unsupervised classification technique inspired by the behavior of a particular species of ants called Pachycondyla apicalis. The performances of this method were compared with those of three other ones, also inspired by the social behavior of ants: AntClass, AntTree and AntClust.
Kuo et al. [4], [38] proposed ant K-means (AK) clustering method. AK algo- rithm modifies the K-means as locating the objects in a cluster with the probability, which is updated by the pheromone, while the rule of updating pheromone is according to total within cluster variance (TWCV).
Tsai et al. [65] proposed a novel clustering method called ant colony optimiza- tion with different favor algorithm which performed better than the fast self- organizing map (SOM) K-means approach and genetic K-means algorithm.
Weng et al. [69] proposed a time series segmentation algorithm based on the ant colony optimization algorithm to exhibit the changeability of the time series data. Authors used the Bottom-Up method, which has been reported to give good results for time series segmentation. The research result shows that time series segmentation run by the ACO algorithm not only automatically identifies the number of segments, but its segmentation cost was lower than that of the time series segmentation using the Bottom-Up method.

16 Grosan, Abraham, and Chis
Shelokar et al. [57] developed an ant colony optimization metaheuristic as a rule based machine learning method, called as ant colony classifier system , and applied to three process engineering examples. The learning algorithm addresses the problem of knowledge acquisition in terms of rules from example cases by developing and maintaining the knowledge base through the use of simple mechanism, pheromone trail information matrix and use of available heuristic information. The performance of an ant colony classifier is compared with the well-known decision tree based C4.5 algorithm in terms of the predictive accuracy on test cases and the simplicity of rules discovered.
Handl et al. [10] proposed a novel ant based clustering method by incorporating adaptive, heterogeneous ants, a time-dependent transporting activity, and a method that transforms the spatial embedding produced by the algorithm into an explicit partitioning. Empirical results demonstrate the ability of ant-based clustering and sorting to automatically identify the number of clusters inherent to a data collection, and to produce high quality solutions. However, the performance of the algorithm for topographic mapping was not really very good.
Web usage mining attempts to discover useful knowledge from the secondary data obtained from the interactions of the users with the Web. Web usage mining has become very critical for effective Web site management, creating adaptive Web sites, business and support services, personalization, network traffic flow analysis and so on. Abraham and Ramos [3] proposed an ant clustering algorithm to discover Web usage patterns (data clusters) and a linear genetic programming approach to analyze the visitor trends. Empirical results clearly show that ant colony clustering performs well when compared to a self organizing map (for clustering Web usage patterns).